Hey, guys.
Welcome to another Swift Deep Dive. In this Deep Dive,
we're going to talk about Closures.
Closures are essentially anonymous functions or functions without a name and they're essentially a self-contained
package of functionality that we can pass around and use.
So we've seen a lot of functions up till now. And we know that when we create a function, we always start
with the func keyword.
And then we give our function a name, and then we have a section that's enclosed in parentheses that
represent the input parameters and the input parameter type.
And finally, we have this little dash and angle bracket to represent the returnType, i.e., what is the
data type of the thing that we will output from our function.
And in the body of our function, i.e., between the curly braces, we get our function to do something, and
then finally, if our function has an output, then we get it to return the output.
So, essentially, our function is a little bit like a bread cutting machine.
You have an input, say, your bread, and then you pass it through your function and you get an output.
Something happens to the bread, it gets cut up in slices.
You can determine how thick or thin the slice is. But, essentially, all it is is a bunch of functionality
that's packaged together and given a function name so that we can refer to it later on when we need
that functionality, so we can call the method or call the function by its name, giving it inputs and receiving
the outputs.
So up till now, we've seen three variations on function.
We've seen functions that only do something without needing an input or having an output.
And then we've seen functions which take an input and then we've seen functions which do all three, i.e.,
a function that takes input and has an output and does something in between.
But let's now look at the step beyond that.
The interesting thing about functions is that you can actually pass a function as an input to another
function and you can also have a function as the output of another function.
So I can show you this better in playgrounds.
So I've got a blank playground here.
What I'm going to do is I'm going to create a function that's called calculator, and what it does is
it takes a number n1, and it also takes another number n2, and they're both integers, and the calculator
also returns an integer.
So all that our calculator is going to do right now is it's just going to add n1 to n2, and it returns
the result of the first number added to the second number.
So let's give it a spin. Let's say a calculator and give it to numbers 2 and 3. And we can see the output
is 5.
So all is working as expected.
Now, say, if we wanted to change the calculator to a multiplication calculator, then we would have to go
into the body of the calculator and change the return statement.
Now, what if we wanted to be able to pass in a function as an input to our calculator function in order
to determine what sort of mathematical operation it should perform?
So in order to do this, we're going to create another function, and I'm going to call my function add,
and it, again, takes two numbers.
So let's call it no1 and no2,
and it returns a number as well.
So now we're going to return no1 + no2.
So this is our basic addition operand, essentially, and we're going to go and modify our calculator
so that it not only takes two numbers as inputs, but we're gonna give it a third input in the form of
a function. In order to put this function in as an input, we're going to have to boil down this function
into its data types.
So if we have a look at this function, you can see that it takes two inputs, both in the form of integers
and returns an integer as an output.
So if you boil down this function to its data types, essentially, all it is is int, int, and returns an int.
So if we take this representation of that function and we pass it in as the data type of our third parameter
which we'll call operation,
so as you can see, we've got three parameters as inputs for our calculator function, n1, n2, so those
are the two numbers that we're going to give our calculator.
And then, finally, we've got a parameter called operation and the data type of operation is in the format
of a function, i.e., it's not just int, it's not just string, but it's actually the boiled down version
of a function, i.e., two integer parameter inputs and returns a single integer.
Now, the next thing to do is to change this return statement. At the moment, our calculator is still returning
the first number multiplied it by the second number.
But instead, what we want to do is we want to call this function that's currently called operation,
so we can, instead, return operation and we can give it the required inputs.
So as we specified, it takes two inputs and returns one output, and the two inputs have to be integers.
So this is where we're going to pass in our n1 and n2.
So now, Xcode is complaining over here because this is no longer how you call the calculator function
because instead of having two parameters, it's now got three.
So let's try calling it again and get Xcode to type out the function for us.
So the first number is, again, two, second number is three, and the operation is going to be "add," so that we
pass in this function as an input parameter.
And, essentially, what happens is that two goes over here, three goes into here,
and the operation, this function add gets passed in over here as the operation.
And what we return from our calculator function is we return by calling this function that's under the
operation parameter passing in the original inputs n1, n2.
So whichever function gets passed in as the operation will process these two numbers.
So in this case, we passed in the add a function as the operation, and the n1, n2 then goes over
here as the inputs, and we return n2 + n2.
So if I create another function, say, let's call it multiply, then I can have again two inputs.
So no1,
no2.
And it also returns an integer.
So in this case, we're returning no1 multiplied by no2.
So if I go ahead and change the function that we pass in to our calculator by changing it to multiply
instead, then you can see that the result changes to 6, because now instead of this add function being
passed in as the operation, we've actually got the multiply function being passed in here.
So I hope you'll believe me now when I tell you that you can pass in functions as inputs into other
functions and you can also use functions as the return type.
So now let's clean this up a little bit because we've actually got quite a few lines of code to do something
quite simple.
So to make things clear, I've got a multiply function that gets passed into the calculator as an input
and it's used to perform the calculation.
So at the moment, everything's very wordy and we've got quite a few lines of code.
Now, if I wanted to cut this down, I can instead use a closure.
So closures if you remember are anonymous functions or you can consider functions as named closures.
But, essentially, they're just packages of functionality which you can pass around freely.
So if we have a look at the structure of our function, which we're very familiar with, we've got a section
that's the input.
Remember, that's the part between the parentheses,
and then we've got a part that's the output.
So that's the part that comes after the dash and angle bracket.
And then we've got this func keyword which we've been using every single time we created a new function.
And finally, we've got a part that represents the name of the function.
So in order to convert this function to a closure, all we need to do is to remove the keyword func and
the name of the function.
And then we move this open bracket from the end of the line to the beginning of the closure and we replace
it instead with the keyword "in."
So now we've successfully converted a function into a closure.
And as you can see, it's pretty anonymous.
All you have is a block of code which you can pass around freely into other functions or set as a variable.
So let's try and do the same with our multiply function. Instead of calling this multiply function,
what we can do instead is we can pass in a closure. So remember the first thing we do is we delete the
func keyword and the name of the function.
The next thing we do is we move this open bracket to the beginning of the block of code and we replace
it with the keyword "in."
So now we have our closure and we can put it in here as an input parameter.
So you'll notice that nothing has changed, output wise, it's still working as it did before, but we've
now cut down on two lines of code. But it gets crazier than that. We can actually cut down this code even
further.
So as you know Swift has the ability to infer data types based on the value.
So if you have a variable "a" that contains a number, then Swift will automatically assign the data type
int to this variable, and that's called type inference. And we can use that here as well.
So instead of explicitly declaring the data type of these parameters, we can actually delete it
and it still works fine. Because when we pass in these inputs into this closure, the compiler will be
able to figure out what the data type of these parameters should be.
And you can do the same thing with the return type.
So you can actually get rid of this part entirely because we have a calculation in here, i.e., the first
number multiplied by the second number, the output has a data type based on the inputs.
So we can actually get rid of this part, too, and get the compiler to infer the data type of the output.
Now, our code is beginning to look a lot shorter than it did before. And I'm not even done yet.
We can also get rid of this return keyword because we're inside a closure and there is a operation that's
being carried out.
The compiler can infer that you want something to be returned based on the simple fact that you're processing
something inside your closure.
So we're pretty much at the point where everything can be expressed in one line.
Now, you might think that it can't get any shorter, but it can. Because in Swift, closures has the ability
to provide anonymous parameter names.
So here we've given our parameters names: no1 and no2.
And later, we refer to those parameter names to carry out our expression.
But instead of doing this, you can actually use the anonymous parameter names.
So in Swift, a dollar sign with a zero refers to the first parameter, and a dollar sign with a 1 refers
to the second parameter, and so on and so forth.
So instead of expressing this line like so, we can actually just change it to first parameter multiplied
by second parameter.
So now if I assign the result of this calculator function to a constant and then I print out this result,
you can see that we've still got the same result as before even though we've cut down four lines of
code, everything is still working exactly the same.
And to take this to the extreme, we can actually cut down this line even further, believe it or not, because
in Swift there is a rule whereby if the last parameter in your function is a closure, i.e., everything
between the open and closing curly braces.
That's what our closure has simplified down to. Then you can actually omit the last parameter name and
you can close the input section, and simply just have the closure trailing at the end.
So this is called a trailing closure.
So, again, as you can see, that has done nothing to change our result.
Everything is still working as it did before.
But instead of all of this, we now just have a single line.
So one of the nice things about closures is that they can dramatically simplify your code and cut down
on your code.
But the downside to that is that readability suffers, because for somebody who is not very familiar with
Swift coming in and looking at this line of code, it can be quite confusing. Because as you remember, we
went through many many steps in order to cut down all of this expressive syntax into something that
is very, very succinct.
Now, you can argue that shorter is better, or some programmers might argue that this has way more style
then something like this, which is true, but you always have to strike the balance between simplicity
and readability.
So that decision is mostly up to you. If you become more and more familiar with the language, you might
actually have a preference of having a vastly simplified code file.
Now, of course, this is just a made-up example to show you the process of passing in functions as inputs
or passing in functions as outputs.
This code doesn't stand up in real life because it's so much easier to simply just write "n1 * n2
equals the result,"
right?
So let me show you how we would use this in real life.
Now, say, if we have an array with a bunch of numbers and we want to be able to add 1 to each of the
items in the array.
Now, the roundabout way of doing this is using what's called a for-loop and you can iterate through each
of these items in order to add 1 to every one of them.
But there's a much simpler way of doing this because there is a function called map that Swift provides
that allows you to transform every single item in a collection type.
So collection types are arrays or dictionaries, basically, collections of items.
So let me show you how it would work.
We first have to define a rule in order to transform our array.
So if I create a function code addOne and all it does is it takes one number and it returns a number,
but, of course, with 1 added to it.
So, essentially, we return n1 + 1.
So that's pretty simple, right?
But then what we can do is we can tap into our array and we can use the map function to transform this
array.
Now, the map function takes an input in the form of another function.
So if we use addOne here and you go ahead and hit enter, you can see that your array gets transformed
with every single item being one greater than previously.
So that's pretty neat.
But why do we have to write so much code when we know all about closures? And I'd like to pose this as
a challenge to you.
Can you write the code to turn this into a closure instead? Pause the video, check the closure syntax,
and I'll show you the solution in a bit. Ready?
Here's the solution.
So if you remember, in order to turn this into a closure, we delete the func keyword and would delete
the name of the function.
Then we move the open curly brace to the beginning of the code block and we replace that instead with
the keyword "in."
So now we can put this, instead of using that function name.
And, of course, we can use some of those snazzy tricks that we learned about previously where we first
used type inference to make the compiler infer the data type of the input as well as the output. We can
use
an implicit return, because we only have one expression inside our closure, so we can get rid of the return
keyword.
And finally, we can get rid of this whole thing by just simply using the shorthand notation for the parameters
and we say the first parameter plus 1. And we can go even further and get rid of these parentheses
because our closure is the last item in the list of parameters, i.e,. it's trailing. And if we print the
result of this out, you can see that we've mapped our previous array to increase each item by 1. So Swift
has three of these really useful high-level functions called map, reduce, and filter. And you can do some
really useful things with them.
For example, you've realized that your array contains integers, right? But we actually want to convert each
of them into strings.
So what you can do instead is this. Let's say, we create a new constant code newArray and we set it to
equal array.map, and we use the string interpolation method where we enclose the integer inside
a string.
So now if we print out this newArray, you can see that it's composed of entirely strings. So we've essentially
stringified each item in this array by simply writing a very short bit of code and using the map functionality.
So in essence, you'll find that closures can be a very succinct way of expressing your code. And in the
cases where you're passing in functions into other functions, it can make your code a lot more readable.
Now, of course, that depends on your own familiarity with the syntax and other people's familiarity
if you're working on a project together. But all in all, closures allow you to package anonymous blocks
of functionality and pass it around in your code.
So essentially, this is the syntax for a closure.
You have the parentheses that surround the input parameters.
You have the dash and angle brackets that specify the return type, and the "in" keyword denotes the beginning
of your closure body.
So this is the functionality that your closure is going to perform and everything is contained inside
these curly braces. And the closure doesn't have a name or a funky word and you can recognize it by this
syntax. If you'd like to know more about closures or review what we've discussed in this lesson, I recommend
having a quick look at this section in the Swift Language Guide.
As always, you'll find the link on the course resources page, and I'll see you on the next lesson.